Mesh template time series report related stuff (#19)
Volue-Public/energy-smp-docs: docs/timeseries-reports/sort_contents.md

  - The value next to this keyword may be an in-place definition or it may be a reference to a Mesh resource "*file*", see [here](#maintain-a-global-sorting-definition) for how to create/maintain such definitions.

## General introduction

[About Mesh model definition and models.](../mesh/concepts/modelling/general.md)

[About Mesh template time series reports.](./reports_intro.md)

The template based approach provided by Mesh is based on a high level report definition that expands to real contents by use of queries into the Mesh model. That means the *same* report definition can be applied to
different areas of the Mesh model and thereby provide different contents.

This expandable and reusable report definition gives a lot of advantages but also less direct control over the layout, that is
the order of the appearance typically visible in a table view. To compensate for this, the Mesh report definition and report activation

> provide different **order by** alternatives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This expandable and reusable report definition has many advantages, but also give less direct control over the layout, that is the order of the appearance typically visible in a table view. To compensate for this, the Mesh report definition and report activation
provide different **order by** alternatives.
```

## Time series report layout

In previous sections we have briefly described the process of activating a report definition at one or more start-points in a Mesh model.
That process is about collecting time series to be part of the activated report. In this section we will discuss how this collection of time series
is ordered and "decorated" when presented out of the box.

There are two main layout specifications:

- The order of appearance in a tabular view layout
  - Originally, before Mesh, this was controlled by the order of column definitions in the report definition
  - The dynamic behavior of Mesh template reports makes *order by* features important
- Legends, headers, colors, pages, groups ++

>   - A lot of these attributes have to use macros that makes it possible to adapt to the properties of current object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Many of these attributes have to use macros to make it possible to adapt to the properties of the current object.
```

    - Without macros all the attributes that originates from the same report column definition would be equal

### The order by features supported by Mesh template reports

There are three levels where you can configure this:

- Local
  - Applied to results from a single TS_BINDING request

> - Start point

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Starting point
```

  - Control the order of start points applied to build the report instance
- Global
  - Apply a full sort operation when **all** series are collected

The *Global* approach override the other two definitions.
*Start point* ordering and *Local* ordering can work together.

#### Evaluating the order by criterion

The sorting algorithm that is used in Mesh evaluates a potential criterion value for each hierarchical level of the
object path, starting from top level which is the model components. (A component is a Mesh object owned directly by the Mesh model). If the criterion value is equal for the compared objects, then move on to next hierarchical
level and do the same type of operation.

The basic algorithm can be illustrated like this:

![SortAlgorithm](sort_flow_diagram.png)

This flow shows the main process. There is some special handling when the hierarchical paths have different depth and the two objects to compare have different type.

> If the objects to compare have different type this logic is applied:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the objects to compare have different type, this logic is applied:
```

- If the sort definitions involved are compatible - proceed as normal. Example: Both types have `Topology` as definition

> - If not compatible, try to find equal types further down the object path

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the sort definitions involved are compatible - proceed as normal. Example: Both types have `Topology` as definition.
- If not compatible, try to find equal types further down the object path.
```

#### Mesh object path

> As we understand from the flow chart above, each object in Mesh have a unique path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we understand from the flow chart above, each object in Mesh has a unique path.
```

See [description of Mesh path.](../mesh/concepts/modelling/general.md#objects-and-attributes-paths)

In a template report definition the contents refer to Mesh model objects, more precise
to time series attributes or time series collection attributes.

Each part of the object path below the model name may have an **order-by** specification attached.
Such specifications are linked to objects through their object type.

The **order-by** specification provide details on how to find the criterion value associated with a concrete instance.  

#### The order-by specification format

The following format is used to configure how the sorting should be done:

- `TypeName=Sortdef[,TypeName=Sortdef ...]`
  - Sortdef is: `AValidSearchDef[:D][;AValidSearchDef[:D] ...]`

>     - There may be several search definitions in prioritized order. First definition that find a valid criterion value is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - There may be several search definitions in prioritised order. The first definition that find a valid criterion value is used.
```

- `Ignore` - do not apply any comparison 

In addition to a valid `TypeName` it is possible to use a generic type name `Default` which then hold a definition for all types are not explicitly mentioned in the order by definition.

Examples:

- `Default=Ignore,Reservoir=.HRWL:D`
  - Sort objects by the descending `HRWL` attribute value (Highest Regulated Water Level) found on instances of type `Reservoir`
  - For all other types - do no comparison
- `Default=Ignore,WaterCourse=Name,cWaterCourse=Name,Reservoir=.HRWL,cReservoir=to_Reservoir.HRWL`
  - Same as a above, but group according to watercourse name and use ascending order
  - Included specification for case objects
    - For cReservoir objects - go to linked asset object (`to_Reservoir`) and use `HRWL`

*PS! For the `TEMPLATE_ORDER_BY` definition it was possible to have a simplified format like `.HRWL` or even `HRWL` which the sort algorithm would take
as a definition implicitly connected to the type owning the time series attribute.* **This is no longer supported.**

### Multiple scopes of order by definition

> As mentioned earlier there are three levels where an order by definition is applicable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned above there are three levels where an order by definition is applicable.
```

#### Local

At this level we use the report column definition attribute `TEMPLATE_ORDER_BY`.

The definition is used to sort the time series attributes found from applying the search

> operation defined by the `TS_BINDING`. The sorted list is added to collection of time series for activated report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The definition is used to sort the time series attributes found from applying the search
operation defined by the `TS_BINDING`. The sorted list is added to the collection of time series for activated report.
```

       add tslist (sorted or not sorted) to activated report contents
```

The scope now is related to sort the list of start-points.

Example of a start point definition:  
`*[.Type=WaterCourse]ORDER_BY:Area=Name,WaterCourse=.SortIndex`

This definition means:

- Find start points by looking for watercourse objects in the current Mesh model. Current model is configured at task level.
- Sort them according to an attribute called `SortIndex` assumed to be available on instances of the WaterCourse type and group them according to area name.

There may be several start point search sections separated with semicolon `;`. Observe that the eventual order by section (starting with `ORDER_BY:`) is defined
**immediately** after the search definition. This is because it *belongs* to that specific search expression. The next search section will have its own order by definition.

Example of multiple start point definitions:  
`*[.Type=WaterCourse]ORDER_BY:Area=Name,WaterCourse=.SortIndex;*[.Type=SomeType]ORDER_BY:Default=Ignore,HydroPlant=.SortIndex`

As described above, the parsing of the start-point definition is rather strict.

#### Global

> If there is a global scope order by definition in place, then it will override the definitions described above (*Local* and *Start point*).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there is a global scope order by definition in place, it will override the definitions described above (*Local* and *Starting point*).
```

  - `Resource/ConfigFiles/OrderBy/Default.sort`
- Add order by definition as described above immediately after the `ORDER_BY_CONFIG:` keyword

The format of the global sort specification is the same as already described. When resource "files" are used it normally contains multiple lines, one line per type. Like this:

File *MySort.sort*
```
Default=Ignore
cReservoir=to_Reservoir.HRWL:D
Reservoir=.HRWL:D
```

These two definitions are equivalent:

- `start-point definiton;ORDER_BY_CONFIG:Resource/ConfigFiles/OrderBy/MySort.sort`
- `start-point definiton;ORDER_BY_CONFIG:Default=Ignore,cReservoir=to_Reservoir.HRWL:D,Reservoir=.HRWL:D`

To utilize the special definition `Default.sort` may be convenient but due the its *global* scope it can have side undesired effects.
Therefore, be aware that it might be used in places you did not want it to. To avoid such interference from a "hidden" default you can add a 
global order by definition that explicitly say: *do not apply a global sort operation*. It is done by referring to a resource called
`None.sort`. The system just look at the name and it does not try to look it up, hence it does not need to exist. See example below.

> #### Some examples of start point definitions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Some examples of starting point definitions
```

Examples:
- `*[.Type=HydroPlant];ORDER_BY_CONFIG:Resource/ConfigFiles/OrderBy/MySort.sort`  
    Apply global sort definitions found on `MySort.sort` file. Those types not explicitly mentioned in that definition will use ascending Name as criteria. 
- `*[.Type=HydroPlant]ORDER_BY:HydroPlant=.OwnerShare;ORDER_BY_CONFIG:None.sort`  

>     Order starting point list according to ascending value on OwnerShare attribute on HydroPlant. The reference to `None.sort` will ensure that a potential default global sort will not override the ORDER_BY settings specified here

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Order starting point list according to the ascending value of the **OwnerShare** attribute on **HydroPlant**. The reference to `None.sort` will ensure that a potential default global sort will not override the ORDER_BY settings specified here.
```

- `*[.Type=HydroPlant]ORDER_BY:HydroPlant=.OwnerShare:D,WaterCourse=.SomeAttribute`  
    Sort starting point list according to descending value of OwnerShare attribute. WaterCourse items are sorted according to ascending value of SomeAttribute. PS! These definitions will be ignored if there is a file `Resource/ConfigFiles/OrderBy/Default.sort` installed

### Best practice

It's hard to say what's the preferred method to setup a proper *order-by* definition. It depends on the type of report at hand. 
In this section some hints and considerations are discussed.

#### The implications of report activation process

> When you choose an *order-by* method it is important to understand the report activation process and therefore, some details about that are described here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you choose an *order-by* method it is important to understand the report activation process. The following section describes some details about this process.
```

![Activation](activation_process.png)

The illustration above shows the following:

- Context
  - There is a task definition 
    - it refers to a report definition

>     - it refers to a start point definition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - it refers to a starting point definition
```

  - The search for start point found two Mesh objects `S1` and `S2`
  - The report contains two column definitions, query `A` and `B`
- Apply report definition for start point `S1`

>   - When query `A` was applied to start point `S1` it found time series attribute `A1`, `A2` and `A3`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - When query `A` was applied to starting point `S1` it found time series attribute `A1`, `A2` and `A3`
```

    - Add these three time series to the report collection

>   - When query `B` was applied to start point `S1` it found time series attribute `B1`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - When query `B` was applied to starting point `S1` it found time series attribute `B1`
```

    - Add this time series to the report collection

> - Apply report definition for start point `S2`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Apply report definition for starting point `S2`
```

>   - When query `A` was applied to start point `S2` it found time series attribute `A1` and `A2`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - When query `A` was applied to starting point `S2` it found time series attribute `A1` and `A2`
```

    - Add these time series to the report collection

If there are `TEMPLATE_ORDER_BY` definitions on column definitions, the result from query will be sorted according to this before adding it to collection.

If there are `ORDER_BY:` at end of start point search definitions, then the result from start point search operation will be sorted according to this.

#### Simple reports

A simple report is for instance a report based on a definition having *one* column definition.
In such cases use of `TEMPLATE_ORDER_BY` will do.

#### Cluster reports

In this group we have report definitions that refer to several time series relative to a dedicated Mesh object type.
Most often it will be bound to that type and normally have several report column definitions (multiple TS_BINDING definitions). It may reach out to several time series attributes on that type as well as other time series attributes found relative  to this type (up/down or through links).

In such cases use of `ORDER_BY` on start point definitions most likely are the best choice. It can also be combined with `TEMPLATE_ORDER_BY` on queries that may return multiple time series.

#### Complex reports

> It's hard to pinpoint exactly what a complex report definition is. One criterion may be that it refers to time series bound to several hierarchical levels. Another is that it contains many column definitions that address time series on different object types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is hard to pinpoint exactly what a complex report definition is. One criterion may be that it refers to time series bound to several hierarchical levels. Another is that it contains many column definitions that address time series on different object types.
```

### Maintain a global sorting definition

A sort definition is given a name and placed into the Mesh resource section. This usage can be compared to a file stored in a hierarchical file system. The tool `Powel.Mesh.CommandlineRequests.exe` can be used to import, export and list available sorting definitions. The commands to do that are (`clr` is used as an alias):

- Import: 
    ```
    clr -i Default.sort -w ImportTextFile -w Resource/ConfigFiles/OrderBy/Default.sort -S
    ```

- Export:
    ```
    clr -o Default.sort -w ExportTextFile -w Resource/ConfigFiles/OrderBy/Default.sort
    clr -w ExportTextFile -w Resource/ConfigFiles/OrderBy/Default.sort
    clr -w ExportTextFile -w Resource/ConfigFiles/OrderBy/Default.sort -w delete
    ```
    First is export to file, second to standard output (terminal) and last is export to file and delete `Resource` definition.

- List available items:
    ```
    clr -w ListTextFiles -w Resource/ConfigFiles/OrderBy
    clr -w ListTextFiles -w Resource/ConfigFiles/OrderBy -w sort
    ```
    First list all types, second list all with suffix *sort*

> PS! At some point there may be a more user-friendly tool to maintain such definitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**_Note!_** At some point there may be a more user-friendly tool to maintain such definitions.
```

```

Some comments:

- Searches for all `Production` series on all `HydroPlant` type objects below a watercourse.
- Do a local order by ascending sort using the local attribute value `OwnerShare`
- The column heading (`TEXT` attribute) refers to local attributes for `SortIndex` and `OwnerShare`. The format `$<$.SortIndex>` is the general format where the inner part is a general search expression. The format `$<OwnerShare>` is simpler form when referring to local attributes (attributes on the object owning this time series).

![Global sort example](local_order_by.png)

### Task setup using start point ordering

This is the report definition:

```
MESH_SESSION_TS "ON"
OBJECT_TYPE 21
MESH_GUID "85e6f7a9-c82d-452f-a32c-9ca9399ab4f6"
DBI_COLUMN
	GRAPHTEXT "$ObjName $AttrName"
	TS_BINDING "*[.Type=Watercourse].Income"
	TEXT "$FullObjName#$AttrName#Parent SI $<$...SortIndex>#SI $<$.SortIndex>"
	BORDERS "Left"
	COLOR_HEAD "Orange Red"
	NAME "WCIncome"
END_COLUMN
DBI_COLUMN
	GRAPHTEXT "$ObjName $AttrName"
	TS_BINDING "*[.Type=HydroPlant].Production"
	TEXT "$FullObjName#$AttrName#Parent SI $<$...SortIndex>#SI $<$.SortIndex>"
	COLOR_HEAD "Blue"
	NAME "PlantProduction"
END_COLUMN
```

> Start point definition (inside task definition):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting point definition (inside task definition):
```

END_COLUMN
DBI_COLUMN
     TEXT "$ObjName#$AttrName"
     GRAPHTEXT "$ObjName $AttrName"
     TS_BINDING "*[.Type=Reservoir].Inflow_distributed"
     COLOR_HEAD "Medium Slate Blue"
     NAME "Inflow_distributed"
END_COLUMN
DBI_COLUMN
     TEXT "$ObjName#$AttrName"
     GRAPHTEXT "$ObjName $AttrName"
     TS_BINDING "*[.Type=HydroPlant].Production_operative"
     COLOR_HEAD "Orange"
     NAME "Production_operative"
END_COLUMN
DBI_COLUMN
     TEXT "$ObjName#$AttrName"
     TS_BINDING "*[.Type=HydroPlant].Production_discharge"
     COLOR_HEAD "Pink"
     NAME "Production_discharge"
END_COLUMN
```

The report is bound to Mesh object type named `WaterCourse`.

The task definition have this start point definition (Nimbus Configurator):

`*[.Type=WaterCourse&&.Name#L.gen];ORDER_BY_CONFIG:Default=Ignore,HydroPlant=Topology,Reservoir=Topology`

PS! The global order by specification is here added directly in the Nimbus task definition. It is also possible to add this definition to a resource "file" and refer that file with full path into Mesh resource section.

The associated table presentation looks like this:

![Global sort example](global_sort.png)

Some comments to the visible layout:

> - The sort definition `Topology` order time series from top highest reservoir in this watercourse

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The sort definition `Topology` order time series from top highest reservoir in this watercourse.
```
